Epilepsy alarms and monitors
Introduction:
Epilepsy alarms and monitors are devices designed to detect seizures and alert
caregivers when a person is experiencing a seizure. There isn’t enough evidence yet to
show that using a seizure alarm or monitor can guarantee someone’s safety during a seizure
or prevent sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP) that is why some people with
epilepsy have found using alarms and monitors helpful as part of a risk reduction plan.
Most seizure alarms are designed to detect tonic-clonic seizures. These seizures are easier
to detect because they involve movement.
How to choose:
- infos:
Most of the alarms and monitors systems detect movement, but some detect
sound, heart-rate, urination, getting out of bed and, more recently, brain activity.
- Question to ask yourself:
So fi you want to choose a system you must know what goal of detection you what by
asking if you want:
- Detection during specific period
- Detection in or/and outside
- Detection of the type of seizure
Type of alarms and monitoring system:
- Wearable seizure alarms and monitors
- Apps and seizure alert subscription services paired with a device
- Bed monitors
- Seizure alarms with video monitoring
How it works:
Some devices respond to repeated shaking movements, which may indicate the person is
having a seizure.This can be useful for detecting tonic-clonic seizures, as well as focal motor
seizures (if there is enough movement involved).Case of common systems:
- Wearable devices, such as smartwatches or bracelets, often use
accelerometers to detect abnormal movements that are common during
seizures. When the system detects abnormal motion, it sends a signal to his
care providers team.
For example, the Embrace2 is a wrist-worn wearable device that detects
possible convulsive seizures and instantly alerts caregivers, whether they are
nearby or far away.
- Some devices utilize electrodermal activity (EDA) and photoplethysmography
(PPG) to detect changes in skin conductance and blood flow, which can
indicate a seizure. Machine learning algorithms can be applied to data from
these sensors to improve detection accuracy.
- Bed alarms and mattress devices are placed under the mattress and use
motion sensors to detect unusual movements during sleep. These devices
can alert caregivers if a seizure is detected. Some bed monitors trigger an
alert when it senses repetitive muscle spasms like that of a tonic-clonic/grand
mal seizure.
- Seizure detection devices can also be non-wearable, such as camera devices
that use infrared cameras to detect movements and trigger alarms when
unusual movements are detected.